This chapter will delve into current research, projects and articles related with computer vision
for sports’ data extraction. The interest in this field is relatively recent, however there is already
a wide set of information sources necessary to evaluate the feasibility of a developing a potential
solution. Most of these sources layout out the scientific and technical principles applied in the
development of their solutions that were successfully tested and evaluated. It is important
therefore to have a deeper analysis and reflection on these principles to assess on the most
appropriate approach for this project. The review’s goal is to gather the knowledge required
for the successful development and evaluation of this project’s solution.
2.1
Basketball video analysis
The ”Open Source Sports Video Analysis using Machine Learning” article [5] is one of the
most comprehensive resources publicly available. It serves as a complete description of ”bas-
ketballVideoAnalysis” open source project [4] that has the goal of tracking players, objects and
actions for allowing the analysis of basketball match recordings. This article [5] also references
many other authoritative resources that must be considered when developing similar projects.
Stephan also suggests that this algorithm can be adapted for other collective sports. The article
[5] goes on to describe that the ”basketballVideoAnalysis” project [4] can track the match by
executing a machine learning and image processing pipeline. This pipeline consists on basket-
ball court detection as well as tracking humans inside the court and mapping their movements
to their position relative to the court.
The court detection is critical in this system because without it there is no reference needed
to position objects (human bodies and ball) and to filter out the noise (all remaining object
outside the court). The surface detection, in this article [5], is a pure image processing algorithm
composed of naive OpenCV [7] functionalities such as HSV conversion, Hue range filtering,
Bitwise-AND masking, Canny edge detection and Hough Transformation. These functionality’s
combination filters the input’s noise out and intensifies the machine learning features’ intensity.
The following step is to detect the people [5] in the court which is essential because it
extracts the segmented image containing the person’s to then be used for further steps such
as player identification, player tracking, homographic mapping, pose estimation and action
recognition. The people detection is undertaken using robust common object detection mod-
els, such as CNN(https://heartbeat.comet.ml/a-2019-guide-to-object-detection-9509987954c3),
and train them against existing image curated datasets, for instance COCO image dataset
(https://cocodataset.org/home).
The article [5] points out how identifying players can be challenging by quoting an excerpt
from ”Learning to Track and Identify Players from Broadcast Sports Videos”(https://www.cs.ubc.ca/ murphyk/
pami12.pdf) that describes the technical and logistical obstacles associated with this task.
The last step, in Stephan’s project [4] is to map the current camera view to a reference
6Computational Imaging
map in order to accurately determine where objects (including people) are located in the field.
In this operation, the OpenCV [7] ”findHomography” takes the original image points and the
reference map coordinates to transform and map the original image onto the reference map.
2.2
Conclusion
Based on previous research this process is possibly accomplished by decomposing the problem
into a pipeline [2] [3] [5], composed by:
1. Court detection (lines and points/objects of reference);
2. Object detection (humans and ball);
3. Object tracking;
4. Homographic mapping of objects;
5. Team identification (different teams and referees);
6. Player identification.